Today is November the 23rd, and I'm interviewing
Dr. Don F. Seaman, professor of
interdisciplinary education and also head of
that department, has been in Texas A&M since 1971.
We're going to talk a little bit about perceptions
and changes that have come about at Texas A&M since
you arrived, which was very shortly after the
college was born in 1969. Who was responsible
primarily for you coming to A&M? Probably,
you mean at the university or elsewhere? At the
university, for coming to me. Well, Don Clark was
the individual who interviewed me and talked to me
over the phone and asked me to come for the
interview. And then because of certain
circumstances, I had decided not to come. Then Don
was the one who got on the phone and called me back
and told me those circumstances had changed, and I
agreed to come over the phone once we negotiated
salary. Okay. And since your arrival at Texas A&M
in 1971, what are some of the major changes that you
have perceived in, you know, political,
sociological, philosophical, whatever, and
what do you think caused these major changes?
First was growth. Okay. In 1971, when I came, A&M
had 14,000 students. And much of the growth in the
70s was in the College of Education. This put a lot
of pressure on us for space and faculty. And that
caused some change, because I think the nature of
the college changed from kind of a balanced
college to one of undergraduate teacher
education emphasis. Then I think some new
programs, science education was one, adult
education and vocational ed, educational
technologies are all new programs that started
since 71. So I've seen the influx of a balance of
those kinds of things and a mixture. I think the
college was a bit more narrow in scope In 71, I think
the demands of the public for various kinds of
programs have caused the college to broaden its
scope and maybe its mission. Wasn't voc ed already
in there? Is that a new program? I thought vocation
had a close way back. Started in 1971. What was it
before? Was it called something else, or was there
not any vocational training at all? No, I think
industrially it was there. Over in... What was it,
engineering technology or someplace? Right,
okay. So there was no vocational education?
Vocational education was created in 1971 through
the, what was that act? EPDA. Right, I think Dr.
Boone mentioned that. And through a bunch of
fellowships that they got in 71. Okay, so that's
relatively new. Well, then Gronemann was with
industrial ed. Yes. All of these were part of the
other, okay. Yeah. Okay. And, okay, growth is one.
Is there some other? I could say the broadening of
the scope of the college with the various kinds of
programs. What
were the major causes for this? Was it just the
demand of people? I think the college meeting the
needs and demands of the public. To what extent,
then, do you feel that the college has been
achieving its mission, which is very broadly
defined as teaching, research, and service, What
is the balance in those, say, in your area, the
emphasis? I would say in general, the college has
been meeting the teaching and service aspect
probably more than the research. One or two
departments probably have been meeting all
three. But I'd say the balance has been mostly in
teaching and service at this point. In your own
personal, through your time, how do you balance? I
mean, what, for example, time-wise percentage,
you know, what percentage of your time do you do
teaching service-oriented activity or
research? Well, about 40% to 50% of my time right
now is administration. Oh, OK. Is that true of most
department heads? Oh, I would say so. It surely is.
And I've got a small department. The bigger
departments, probably it's even more than that. I
don't know. I teach a course each semester,
usually. 101 a semester.
I try to publish somewhat regularly and
probably give more time to service than I should,
but it's difficult to turn it down. And are you very
active also in organizational things, like your
professional organizations? Not quite as much as
I was. I was president of our national
association. That took an awful lot of time. For
three years, that was a three-year commitment.
But now I've backed off and do sometimes each year.
Is that encouraged within the college to do a lot of
professional association? The dean told me he had
just come off being president of the association.
He said take whatever time it takes because it's
important and do it. How do you feel that this
tremendous growth that you just talked about has
affected the work that you do with students? Well,
our program has gone from nothing in 1971 to about
130, 140 students. Wow. And it loads the faculty.
Our off-campus program takes some of our time and
effort also, but that is a very good recruiting
device and gets some very good quality students
that way. So it does require more time for teaching
and service, at least less time for research, It
doesn't have to be that way. For example, this
semester I'm using students in my classes to start
collecting some initial data. They're field
testing questionnaires for me that I'm going to
use for collecting data in my own research
probably this spring. So that can be done if it's
part of the class assignment carries out real
well. I think you can plan and do it. But we've had
two professional journals in our department in
the last five years. And that's a lot of service.
Takes a lot of time, but those kind of things bring a
lot of prestige to the university. A lot of people
in my field know where Texas A&M is and who's there
that never paid attention to it before. And I think
that's meaningful. You're talking about the
Lifelong Learning Journal and what's the other
one? And the Adult Literacy and Basic Education
that Felons and Conte had for about five years
before they left. Those are two of our three
journals. So when you came then, what did you
come... What department were you a part of?
Educational administration. I was assigned to Ed
Ed for three years. Bob Fellins and I were assigned
there for three years. And I really believe that
Dean Hubert felt that once our soft money ran out,
that adulthood would probably dry up and blow
away. We wouldn't be here any longer. But we filled
in. We went out and started working the field. And
at the end of three years, we had a substantial
number of students. And voc ed still had those
fellowships and some students. So we were put
together with Ray Perkins, who was then in iEd. We
were all assigned to interdisciplinary ed, and we
started functioning like a department. In what
year? 74, fall of 74. Don Clark was the acting
administrator of the department, acting
coordinator. And it was called ID&E from the
beginning? Okay. It was Ray and Bob and myself who
became the 3X. Then we began to add. Okay. And now
you have how many faculty? Well, there are five in
adult education and six in educational
technology, all in IDED. Plus, we use faculty
outside the department to teach courses and chair
committees. They're not adjunct. They're just
people we use. Do you have a limit on how many
committees your people can chair or what? How do
you handle that? On doctor level, we try to limit it
to 7 to 10. Masters, we don't have any limitation.
So because you're dealing, you don't have any
undergraduate, right? No. So because you're
dealing with the graduates, this latest influx of
students into the college is not having a
tremendous impact on your dealing with students,
right? No. Because you're still going to have the
same. It does because educational technology
teaches those service courses. And it has a big
impact because those classes are always full and
students are trying to tear down the doors to get
in. It's their last semester before student
teaching. They don't take it now. It's going to be a
delay and all those sob stories. But they're real.
And I sympathize with them. But it does have an
effect on us. Do you see any collaboration or much
collaboration among departments within the
college or outside the college?
I see some. For example, IDED and EdEd collaborate
on off campus in San Antonio, and now IBTE also. We
register together. We counsel students into each
other's programs and each other's departments
and classes. We try to find out where the
individual's needs are best met and advise
students to go into that department as best we can.
There are a few joint research projects going. Not
many that I know of, not as many as there probably
should be. And there are several proposals that
are going to have faculty from different
departments on them. So there's some of that, yes.
But there could always, there could be more. There
could be much more, yes. What about the College of
Education in collaboration with other colleges
and universities? Are you aware of who? We had two
faculty who had a joint research project with
Agriculture Economics. in studying the learning
styles of the undergraduate students. So that
went on for about a year. But that's the only one
that I know of. When I was part-time ag extension, I
did something at College of Agriculture. When
were you that? Oh, from about 1976 to about 1983, I
guess. You were part-time ag extension? I was
quarter-time ag extension. How did that come
about? They needed some help in their staff
development and didn't have enough. And I had been
a member of Ag Extension, so it seemed like a good
thing to do. And did you teach? Were those classes
or things that you did on campus? Those were
non-credit workshops off campus and going out and
training field staff in Extension, doing some
workshops on campus at state conference. Did you
like that? Enjoyed it very much. That's where I got
my positive strokes. Because people didn't have
to take those. They took them because they wanted
them. So if people were there, I knew it was because
they liked it. I have a lot of secrets. What are your
perceptions of how outsiders view the College of
Education at Texas A&M?
People within the state who have dealt with it seem
to have a pretty high regard for it. I think some of
this, I think much of it comes from the quality of
students we're turning out, both undergraduate
and graduate, and from some of the things some of
the faculty have done in the state, some workshops
and conferences and those kinds of things. I think
they've seen some quality there. Now, outside of
the state of Texas, I don't know. OK. Do you have a
vision of what what the College of Education is
going to be in the 21st century and right now on the
undergraduate level, especially there's a lot of
upheaval and a lot of potential changes. Is it
going to affect your area very much? I don't know.
One thing I keep hearing about is a move towards
certification in adult education. If that comes
about, the form of it and the scope of it may have a
direct effect upon us. What is that? I have not
heard. Move toward certification. Certifying
adult education teachers and administrators in
the state. They don't have anything right now?
They don't have to be certified at all? I have
fought that since I've been at Texas A&M. I have
seen what form certification takes in other
states, and I think it's worthless. A couple of
classes, that doesn't mean anything. And often
the classes they're taking don't do them any good.
So you're against it? I'm against it unless
somebody comes up with something that guarantees
it's going to make a better person by certifying
them. But just taking a couple of classes in adult
ed doesn't mean anything. That's what
certification is in a lot of states. If it's
something meaningful and useful, yeah, I would
support it. So do you have any idea what's going to
happen with the College of Education in the near
future? I think right now we're at the dictates of
the legislature and coordinating board and a lot
of other entities. We're kind of being buffeted
about. Instead of being proactive, we're in a
state of reactivity right now because it's just
the way it is. Is that the norm in most colleges of
education? They don't have time to be reactive?
I've been in three colleges, student and faculty,
and that's the way I've seen it. Always proactive.
Always reactive. Reacting to crises. So your
department is still growing, though? Well, not
anymore. We pretty well put a cap on it. For the
number of faculty we have, we've reached our
limit. And we will not admit probably any more
students than we graduate in the future unless we
get increased faculty. Is there a chance that you
will get increased? We've asked for one, but we'll
see what the budget does.
So when was this cap? Was this cap, I mean, is it a
formal cap, or is this kind of an understood? Our
admission standards are higher, and we're
turning down more applicants. What about the
admission standards? What are they, and how do
they differ from some of the others? Well, they
consist of a combination of experience, graduate
record exam scores, GPR, professional
commitment, professional goals. All these are
determined by what we call an admissions
assessment form that each student must complete.
which includes a VEDA and asking and answering
several questions. Sometimes we'll call them in
for an interview, and occasionally we'll find
that our department won't serve their goals or
professional goals.
What is the GRE requirement right now? We like to
see 450 on each, the verbal and quantitative.
Minimum 450 on each of those. Analytical has a
little meaning for us, but not too much.
Does each department determine their admission
standards? Yes, each department determines its
own. We have a minimum of three years of relevant
experience before we'll admit anybody onto the
doctor.
Can you talk a little bit about the highlights?
You've been at A&M now for... Highlights of what?
Of your career there, your years at A&M, something
that has happened or that you feel good about.
Included in that can be some of your own
contributions as well as insights or anecdotes.
Well, the highlights have been the faculty I've
been privileged to work with. I think we've had
some excellent faculty all across the college. I
can name several, but I won't. I had some wonderful
experience with graduate students. I've seen
students come in and go out and assume positions of
leadership that I just never would have dreamed
possible. One individual, he was a A Meek student
counselor, school counselor in San Antonio is now
a training director in a hard-nosed industry in
Houston. Never would have believed she could have
done that, but they love her. She's just really
good. And some others who are deans and directors
and so forth that I think have just made wonderful
contributions that make your life very
worthwhile. I think winning the faculty
achievement award in continuing education was
one of my highlights. Is that the former students?
Former student association. I think it was 79.
Just prior to when they raised the award in the
amount. What is it now? I think it's 4,000 now. I got
1,000. Is it that much? Mm-hmm. They did it all in
one year, which is fascinating. Hmm.
Let's see. Some innovations... I think when we
innovate, when we start inquiry day, at least at
the beginning, it generates a lot of excitement.
And I like those kinds of things. This inquiry
thing was a big thrust of the inquiry things,
right? Yes. And did everybody buy into that pretty
much, or was it? I don't think everybody
understood it at first. But
I think everybody did it first. But for some
reason, it's kind of waned. The first couple years
we had these were huge crowds. And even classes
turned their students out to come. For the inquiry
day. Now that doesn't happen anymore. That's not
the same, though. That's separate from your
inquiry within the college where they have the
different faculty collaborating on some inquiry
groups. Well, it kind of culminated in inquiry
day. But I don't think the inquiry committees, for
example, the inquiry committee on international
education We haven't had a meeting in over a year,
and there's not much happening there, and I don't
hear too much about some of the other groups
meeting much anymore. Used to be one on the older
adults. I don't hear much about it. I think the
interest has waned or something's happened. In
fact, they're too busy. I don't know what. Did your
faculty buy it? Was your faculty supportive of
that? Did they participate when it first came?
Yeah. We had faculty. I think every one of our
faculty were on one committee or another one. One
of the things that I've heard is that it gave
faculty, because the college had grown so much and
people didn't know each other in different
departments, that it was strictly for a collegial
type, you know, activity to get people to work
outside of department lines and just work on
interest. I think it helped. Was that the goal of,
was that the reason that Dean Corrigan had...
Probably part of it. I think another reason was to
get the faculty more active into inquiry. And I
think that had some success, yes. This has been his
emphasis since he came to Texas A&M. And I think
he's right on target with that. OK, how does that
differ from Dean Hubert's leadership? Can you
elaborate a little bit on the contrast between the
two and what kinds of emphasis were? I never saw
Dean Hubert making much effort to get the faculty
to work interdisciplinary or
cross-disciplinary. I don't think the dean
really encouraged faculty to pursue specific
interests or other kinds of things. You kind of let
them go their own way. And bigger departments and
department heads knew what was best within the
departments. So I think that was one difference.
Can you elaborate a little bit more on your, or
reminisce a little on working under Dean Huber and
what that entailed versus under Dean Corrigan?
What kinds of things were different? I was only
administrator under Dean Huber a little over a
year. Okay. I didn't get too much from him. I
learned much from him on how to prepare and how to
document, do your homework before you ask for
things, which I think is very important. I don't
think he shared as much with us of the university
problems and university politics and university
structure that Dean Corrigan does. I've learned
much of that from Dean Corrigan. Dean Corrigan has
his department head to meet with him individually
once or twice a month. Dean Hubert never did that,
never encouraged that at all. And that's very
helpful, to get to talk to your dean one-on-one
regularly. That's a very good thing to do. Dean
Corrigan has an open door policy. He tells
students that, and they take him up on it. I think it
kind of surprises them when they find out they can
walk into his office with an appointment. They can
go in and talk about anything they want to. And he
listens to them and interacts with them. Dean
Hubert did not do that. I don't think he encouraged
that too much. Did Dean Hubert teach at all? I don't
know. I think he taught a class, but I'm not sure. I
don't really remember. When he went on to be
chancellor, was there continuity
in the office of the dean? Well, Phil Imbacher was
the interim dean, and he had been in the dean's
office as assistant or associate So him
maintaining that office, certainly there was
continuity. And that was his purpose. And his goal
was simply maintain it. There were no new programs
or anything like that going on or starting. But he
kept it going, yes. OK. And any insights or
observations that you have made over the years or
anecdotes, something that stands out as above
particular incident, particular student, or
particular Well, you mentioned one. You already
did mention a student going on to high levels. I
think the biggest thing that I've had to learn is
the Aggie way of doing things. Which is? I'll give
you a couple examples. When I came to Texas A&M to
interview, I decided not to come to A&M
because the individual I was going to be working
under who had been hired before me was not an adult
educator, and he couldn't make graduate faculty.
And I knew I could. So I knew he was going to be doing
all the work. And I went back and told my wife,
scratch A&M. But two or three weeks later, I was
called and told the other guy had resigned. He'd
found something else to do. And then I was asked to
consider the first position. We negotiated over
the phone. So when I came to buy a house, the dean
told me, OK, we're getting some applications in.
And we're going to look at them for the second
person. And when we decide who it is we think, we'll
send it to you and let you take a look at it. So about a
month later, in August, before I came, I got Bob
Pelins' beta and a little note that said, here's
the guy we hired. We hope you like him. Which showed
me right away how Aggies do things. And the other
way, I think, is when Dean Hubert became
chancellor. Because he told me personally that
when he was called in, he was called the night
before the meeting They wanted to talk to him the
next morning, and he thought they were calling him
in to get his input as to what the new chancellor
ought to be. When he walked in the next morning,
they asked him to be chancellor, and he had no idea
they were going to do that. And he had not applied
for the position. So Aggies have interesting ways
of doing things. Now tell me about, in your
department, because I've heard that about
somebody that was hired by the dean when actually
it's up to your department? For example, when you
have a vacancy in your department, what is the
process that you go through? And then does the dean
have the authority to tell somebody you're hired
to be in Don Seaman's department without first
going through you? He has the authority, I guess.
But I've never heard of that happening, at least in
our department. And the procedure is we advertise
a position in the Chronicle and send them to the
commission professors on a network across the
country. We view the applications, all the
faculty do, and we get it down to about two or three.
And then we call at least two people in to
interview, make a certain interview with the dean
also, with the beta. And then at the end of those
interviews, we take our vote, and then I go up and
sit down with the dean and say, here's who we think
we want, and here's why. And to date, he's always
concurred. Do you ever have any student input into
the decisions, or do you let them even look at it?
Every applicant has to present a seminar to our
students. And I can tell you an instance, several
years ago, in a voc-ed position when I was
coordinator, faculty kind of agreed to hire this
individual from an institution in Virginia, and
he gave a seminar to the students, and the students
came in and said, we don't want him. So we didn't
hire him, because the students said they didn't
want him. I figured they're the ones going to have
to We did not hire them. Do you know what they based
that on? They didn't think he was going to be very
conducive to student-faculty relationships.
They asked him some questions. He either didn't
respond or ignored them or gave them the
impression he didn't have to respond to students.
And there were no faculty in there. We purposely
did not sit in there. So we said, hey, if you don't
like him, we're not going to hire him. And we
didn't. How much emphasis do you put on
student-faculty relations? Do you make that a
part of your faculty? It's a very big part of it. Our
students are all adults. They're usually
professionals. Sometimes I think we give
students maybe more attention than we should,
because sometimes they take a lot of time. But
they're the heart of the university. Without
students, we wouldn't need faculty or
administrators. And it's the students for whom
the institution is going to be known, not the
faculty. ultimately it's the students and who
they are and what they are. And if you don't have
good students and treat them fairly and if they
don't have good vibes about your institution, you
can have the best faculty in the world, it doesn't
mean anything. Does your department rely very
much on soft money? At present, no. We did at one
time, at one time we were very heavy into soft
money. We had, gosh, one year we had about 676 to
$700,000.
But not too much now. Now, this year, we have about
140,000 to 150,000. But not much.
Do you encourage your faculty to submit
proposals? I do not encourage the adult faculty
right now because of the student load. When you're
chairing about 10 doctoral committees and
teaching a course or two and that kind of thing, you
haven't got time for projects. And in educational
technology, though, they're writing some grants
and getting some money, and yes. Your department
has gone through some monumental change, not
monumental, but you just inherited a brand new,
not a department, what is it, a part of your
department or a program? Yeah, an academic
program. And also, last year you lost two of your
faculty at one time to a place in Wisconsin.
Montana. Montana. Can you share a little bit about
what that created for you and the department or how
you were able to keep the continuity and how you've
been able to, to manage these things as department
head? With great difficulty.
The rest of the faculty picked up the load or tried
to. We cut back a little bit in teaching so that we
could keep our student advising load going. But
the main thing is that we did not let any students
slow down or did not have any student have any
setback in their progress. We kept them going. We
employed a couple of new faculty as soon as we could
at the assistant professor level. One of them has
already made graduate faculty and is permitted
now to start advising students and the other one is
working on it. So we hired some pretty good people
and kept it going. By graduate faculty, what does
that mean? That means you are permitted to advise
graduate students, chair committees. And that
means you've served on some committees that have
finished, and you've published, and you've done a
few things that are required to do that. And why is
one of your people, or is it the general over the
college, about going up for tenure or for
promotion or whatnot? Is that the criteria set by
the college? In most cases, it's seven years. So
you go in at the beginning of your sixth year. Then
if you don't make it, you've got one more year to
work to find another position.